In 1629,
the Roman Empire had just won the
greatest victory in its history. Within
more than a decade, most of that empire
would be gone.
Syria, Palestine, Egypt, all of it torn
away by an enemy Constantinople had
barely bothered to watch. Men who had
ridden out of the Arabian desert behind
a single idea. By the time the Romans
understood what was happening, the old
frontiers no longer existed. This is the
story of how Rome lost the East and how
the empire that survived will never get
a hold of these territories. By the 630s
AD, the Roman Empire had been in a
largely constant state of warfare for
many years, both against external allies
and whilst fighting civil wars, which
had greatly strained its resources.
[music]
Having fought his way to a costly
victory over the Avars and Persians, the
Emperor Heraclius was now focused on the
state's [music] recovery. The Arab
invasion.
Heraclius' rebuilding of the empire had
three key phases.
Firstly, to further ensure a smooth
succession of power, he declared his son
Heraklonas as Caesar in 632 AD,
intending for him to rule jointly with
his half-brother Constantine III, who
had already been co-emperor for many
years. Secondly, the Romans were now
faced with the arduous task of
rebuilding the administration of the
territories that had been under Persian
occupation for over a decade.
This involved filling out civil posts
that had long been vacant and sorting
through the immense layers of
bureaucracy involved in getting the
economy functioning optimally and Roman
law reestablished.
Lastly, Heraclius made strides in
restoring religious unity in the empire,
which included a decree in 634 AD for
all Jews to convert to Christianity,
which resulted in many conversions.
[music]
Additionally, he continued efforts to
bring the infighting between the
Chalcedonian and Monophysite sects of
[music] Christianity to an end. But as
before, his more moderate approach
ultimately failed to accomplish this.
Heraclius' effort would then be further
disrupted by the oncoming Arab invasion.
[music]
What came next would not be another
broad war. It would be something the
Roman world did not yet have a name for.
The Romans had maintained a frontier
with the Arabian Peninsula for several
centuries, [music] and at the time were
confident it did not present a serious
danger.
In the late 620s AD, there had been some
Arab raids on the frontier of the
empire, but nothing that suggested a
large-scale invasion was imminent.
However, the unexpectedly rapid rise of
Islam and the unification of the Arabs
under the prophet Muhammad and then the
first caliph Abu Bakr would take the
Romans by surprise.
Under the new caliph Umar, the Arabs
attacked the Levant in 634 AD and also
launched a simultaneous assault on
[music] the Sassanid Persians. Both
empires were still recovering from a
recent lengthy period of foreign and
civil wars, only to now be faced with a
fresh and skilled enemy under capable
leadership. The Arabs were able to push
into Roman territory, and it soon became
clear these were more than just raiders.
As the Arabs won a few encounters
against the Romans and started to occupy
cities, [music] most notably Damascus.
The Romans would even begin to cooperate
with their old enemies, the Persians, on
how to deal with this new threat to both
of their empires. In 636 AD, Heraclius
dispatched a large field army against
the Arabs led by the general Vahan, an
experienced soldier of Armenian
extraction who had recently fought in
the Persian War, as well as Theodore
Trithyrius, a senior imperial official.
This forced the Arab forces operating in
Roman territory to consolidate in order
to defeat this imminent threat. Led by
Khalid ibn al-Walid, one of the most
talented Arab commanders of the time,
who confronted the Romans at Yarmouk.
While the details of the battle are not
entirely clear, it was evidently a long
and hard-fought affair that lasted up to
6 days. At first, the fighting went
favorably for the Romans, who were able
to push the Arabs all the way back to
their camps. However, at some point
during the battle, the Arabs were able
to outflank the Romans, and being
trapped in a nearby wadi. This led to a
final round of desperate fighting as the
Romans attempted to break out while the
Arabs cut off their escape route,
resulting in Vahan and Theodore's deaths
along with that of much of their forces.
In 6 days of fighting,
the Roman East had lost the last field
army standing between it and the
invaders.
What came next was not another battle.
It was a collapse.
>> The empires that lasted were run from a
single chamber
with the maps, the ledgers, and the
advisors all sat in the same place. The
clearer the picture, the steadier the
rule.
That principle is what made today's
sponsor stand out.
This video is brought to you by Abacus
AI.
Abacus AI works like that chamber. One
dashboard gives you access to the
leading frontier models, Chat GPT,
Claude, Gemini, Grok, Deep Seek, and
Root LLM,
which will automatically choose the best
model for your request, the way a ruler
would call on the right specialist or
use the right tool. Alongside it sit
image and video generators including
Flux and Sora 2,
and a presentation builder. The piece I
keep coming back to is Deep Agent.
Give it a task and it coordinates
multiple models and tools to carry it
out. From research and presentations to
small apps it can deploy. It connects to
Google Drive and Slack and surprisingly
[music] it's only about $10 a month,
which is far cheaper than paying for
multiple AI tools separately. Check out
Abacus AI by using the link in the
description and pinned comment.
Fall of the Roman East.
With the disaster at Yarmouk and the
fact that the empire was still
recovering from previous wars, [music]
the Romans no longer had any major field
armies to send against the Arabs and
they began a full retreat from Syria.
Some Roman officers also chose to
negotiate their own peace terms with the
Arabs.
The Persians were faring no better as in
637 AD they suffered a disastrous defeat
of their own at the Battle of Qadisiyyah
which precipitated further Arab advances
into the East. To make matters worse,
there were continuing tensions with the
Avars in the Balkans and the recent
defeats had weakened confidence in
Heraclius's leadership. Though it was
unsuccessful, it was yet another sign of
the instability within the empire and
its decline in strength.
By 640 AD, the Arabs had conquered the
entirety of the Levant and pushed into
Armenia, while also threatening
Anatolia.
The important province of Egypt fell in
641 AD after the patriarch of
Alexandria, Cyrus, negotiated a
surrender.
For which he was recalled by Heraclius
and exiled.
Similarly to the recent war with Persia,
the Romans were also forced to retreat
into Anatolia, where the new frontier
with the Arabs would be drawn. Heraclius
would die not long after these events in
February 641 AD,
despite his Herculean efforts to
stabilize the empire in the early 7th
century and the victory over Persia, his
reign is also remembered for the failure
to defeat the Arabs and the subsequent
loss of territory that had been won
[music] back with great effort only a
short time before,
leaving him with a rather mixed legacy.
With Heraclius dead and the Arab tide
still rising, the empire that remained
would spend the next half century
fighting not to win, but simply to
exist.
Struggle for survival.
Heraclius was succeeded by Heraklonas
and Constantine as planned.
But in yet another stroke of ill
fortune, Constantine died within just a
few months.
This led to Heraclius' young grandson,
Constans II,
becoming emperor in October 641 AD with
the support of the army,
forcing Heraklonas and his mother into
exile.
During Constans' reign, the Arabs
extended their operations into the
Mediterranean, taking advantage of the
many advanced port cities now under
their control and the specialists and
facilities within them to begin building
a navy. Constans launched an expedition
to retake the valuable province of Egypt
in 645 AD, but although the Romans
succeeded in securing Alexandria, they
were driven out again the following
year, marking the last time the Romans
attempted to reconquer the province.
The Arabs also continued to launch naval
attacks of their own, taking several
islands off the southern coast of
Anatolia, including Rhodes, and reaching
the Strait of Bosporus.
Further east, the Arabs also overran the
Sassinid Empire by 651 AD,
destroying Rome's old rival.
Constans sent a fleet to put an end to
the Arab naval threat, but the Romans
were defeated at the so-called Battle of
the Masts in 655 AD.
Fortunately for Rome, the Arabs were at
the time also distracted by their own
infighting.
As the Caliph Uthman was assassinated
the following year,
Constans was thus able to negotiate a
truce with the Arabs in 659 AD,
relieving pressure on the eastern
frontier.
It was also likely that around this time
that a new system of military
organization and provincial
administration was introduced to the
Roman Empire,
known as the thematic system.
The precise origins of this reform have
long been a matter of debate, but it
seems likely the truce negotiated with
the Arabs by Constans [music] enabled it
to occur during a period of peace
between 659 and 662 AD.
As a military organization, the themes,
or themata in Greek, were the
descendants of the Roman field armies of
late antiquity, known as the
comitatenses.
However, the theme was also the
designation of the districts where these
troops were stationed, which encompassed
several of the old Roman provinces from
late antiquity. Each theme's commander,
usually known as strategos, held full
military and civil authority within his
district. Greek had also by now become
the Roman Empire's dominant language.
Thus, Roman emperors had increasingly
started to use the Greek term basileus
instead of the Latin title of Augustus
to describe themselves, while the
Hellenized version of Caesar or Caesar
continued to be used for junior
co-emperors.
This linguistic shift also occurred in
the army, where Latin had been used for
orders and administration for centuries.
Consequently, the themes were given
Hellenized names derived from the field
armies of old. For example, the army of
the East or Oriens became the theme
known as Anatolicon, meaning of the
Orientals. There was also a change in
how the Romans maintained their armies,
as thematic [music] soldiers were
largely supported by the government with
land grants within their respective
themes instead of the more traditional
salaries.
These changes took place alongside
shifts in equipment and tactics that
attempted to meet the new realities of
warfare, and the thematic system would
prove durable and effective for many
centuries, undergoing further evolutions
as territory was taken, lost,
>> [music]
>> or reorganized.
With the Arab frontier in Anatolia
having been re-stabilized by this new
system, Constans traveled to the western
provinces in 663 AD, accompanied by
troops from the Opsician theme.
In recent times, the empire had been
relying a great deal more on the west to
provide resources with the loss of most
of the eastern provinces.
The emperor may have also plans to
introduce the thematic system to the
west, but unfortunately, while he seems
to have made progress in reorganizing
the provinces, his popularity and hold
on power gradually slipped. Ultimately,
he was assassinated while taking a bath
in Syracuse in 668 AD.
Constans was succeeded by his son,
Constantine IV, who immediately returned
to Constantinople, where he was faced
with a rebellion by the commander of the
Armeniac theme, as well as the troops in
Sicily brought from the Opsician theme.
Both rebellions were defeated, but the
instability encouraged the Arabs to
renew their attacks. They raided as far
as Cyzicus, which they occupied in 670
AD, and even launched a direct assault
on Constantinople itself four years
later.
Here, however, the Arabs were defeated
by a Roman navy employing a new type of
incendiary weapon known as Greek fire.
The precise nature of which remains a
point of debate, but was likely a form
of naphtha.
The occupation of Cyzicus and the siege
of Constantinople finally came to an end
by 678 AD after the Arabs suffered
serious losses and concluded a 30-year
truce with the Romans.
While this victory yet again stabilized
the frontier with the Arabs, the Balkans
were invaded by a new and dangerous
enemy in 681 AD in the form of the
Turkic tribe known as the Bulgars, who
conquered the Slavs settled in northern
Thrace, which by now had slipped beyond
effective Roman control.
Constantine led an army to drive the
Bulgars out, but was defeated in battle,
leading to the Romans also losing their
outposts along the Black Sea coast.
Constantine was thus forced to negotiate
and sign a peace treaty with the
Bulgars, who had become a major power in
the Balkans that the Romans would often
have to contend with for centuries to
come.
Constantine himself would die shortly
after these events in 685 AD and was
succeeded by his son Justinian II.
The new emperor was victorious in a
campaign against the Slavs in the
Balkans in 689 AD, during which he was
able to secure the route between
Constantinople and the major city of
Thessalonica in northern Greece, which
had long been targeted by Avar and
Slavic attacks.
After his victory, he forcibly [music]
resettled many Slavs in Anatolia and
enrolled them in the Roman army, hoping
to use them in a campaign to restore
Roman control in Armenia.
Unfortunately for Justinian, these plans
were thwarted as the Slavic soldiers
proved unreliable and in their first
battle with the Arabs at Sebastopolis in
692 AD, most of them deserted.
Justinian was then deposed by the
usurper Leontius in 695 AD, who
mutilated the emperor by cutting off his
nose, making him nominally unfit to
[music] rule before forcing him into
exile in Cherson in Crimea.
The history of Rome throughout the 7th
century AD had been marked by constant
and bitter warfare against enemies both
old and new,
combined with costly civil wars and
internal power struggles, which led to
the empire fighting for its very
survival and seemingly coming to the
verge of collapse, forcing it to adapt
and change in many ways.
This resulted in the the
of a new Rome that was different in many
ways from its antique counterpart.
Hence, the 7th century is sometimes
viewed as the true beginning of
Byzantium. Yet, though weakened, the
Roman Empire had also managed to
tenaciously hold out and even reform
itself to better combat the new threats
it faced in this period of rapid and
often bloody change.
Heraclius had saved Rome from the
Persians. He could not save it from what
came [music] after.
The empire that survived the 7th century
would last another 800 years, carrying
Rome's name, claiming Rome's history,
fighting under Rome's eagles.
But, it has reached a point of no
return.
From this point on, the rest of Roman
history will be an endless struggle
until its final [music] demise.
Make sure to subscribe and hit that bell
button to be notified when the next
episodes are live. Thanks for watching.
If you'd like to help us keep creating
and get early access to our videos,
behind-the-scenes content, and other
perks, consider becoming a member right
here on YouTube or joining us on
Patreon. Every bit of support helps. And
as always, thank you so much for
watching.